Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today we're
going to look at extremely big numbers we're going
to do that because I want to convince you that
thinking of the natural numbers as a completed
set is not correct mathematics we need to think of
the natural numbers as a sequence that progresses
beyond our view the way the ancient Greeks thought
about the way Oyler thought about a Gauss taught
about most mathematicians up to the end of the
19th century thought about so let's have a look
at the natural numbers starting from one two three
four five six seven carry on like that we're using
the hindu-arabic notation so that a bigger number
like six thousand nine hundred thirty seven is
expressed in terms of three operations plus times
and exponentiation I remind you that for two the
three third power or four wedge three also written
for two the three just means four times four
times four three fours multiplied together this
exponentiation allows us to build bigger numbers
very rapidly for example 10 to the 10 means 10
tens all multiplied together that's commonly known
as ten billion and it's a number that features in
economics ten to the hundred is much larger that
consists of this number multiplied by itself ten
times we also write it as 10 to the 10 to the 2
so our convention is that we think of something
like this as the exponents being read from the
top down so first we take 10 squared and then
we evaluate that and then we apply 10 to that
similarly 10 to the thousand which of course is
even much bigger is 10 to the 10 to the three
once we get the hang of this exponents on top
of exponents we can build bigger numbers much
faster we can go 10 to the 10 to the 10 10 to the
10 to the 10 to the 10 and so on now you might
think that this is going to generate a sequence of
ever-increasing Liebig numbers and this is about
as far as we could possibly go thinking about
this sequence but it turns out that when you're
thinking about the natural numbers any method or
technology for producing larger and larger numbers
can be transcended by more powerful technology so
until to understand that point let's go back and
have another look at these operations that we've
been using I'd like to now give you an inductive
definition of operations so we start with the
number 1 and I recall the basic operation of a
successor the successor of a natural number n
is just the next one in the sequence n plus 1
now here's another alternative way of thinking
about what addition is when I define M plus n
in two steps first we define what n plus 1
is well that's just a successor of n which
we assume we understand and then we define M
plus the successor of n in terms of M plus n
this is the inductive step so we see we know the
operation on M plus N and we define what M plus
the successor of n is so here's how we define
multiplication in terms of addition we want to
define M times n first we defined M times 1 that's
by definition just N and now we have to define M
times the successor of n in terms of M times n
so what we're really defining is M times n plus
1 and we're saying that that's equal to m plus m
times n if you think about it for a while you see
that's exactly how we think about M times n plus
1 there's n MS and there's one more so that's n
plus 1 M's definition of multiplication here is an
inductive definition of exponentiation m wedge n
do you find that first m wedge one that's by
definition M then M wedge s of n is defined
to be M times M wedge n so that's in ordinary
language M to the n plus 1 is M times M to the
N well you see that there's a pattern here going
from here to here it's exactly parallel so we can
go up one step we can define a new operation
let's call it square M square in new operation
of new arithmetic operation on natural numbers so
we'll define M square 1 to be M and we'll define M
Squared s m in to be M which M square M so we're
following exactly the same pattern one after the
other this is a new operation let's see what it
means we know m square one that's em what about
M square 2 by definition that's M wedge M square
one which is M wedge M or M to the M 2 m square
3 by definition that's M wedge M square two we
just decided that's m to the M so this is M to
the N to the N what we usually write m to the
M DM similarly mu square 4 you can work out is
m to the M to the M to the M we have a sequence
now of operations starting with multiplication
then wedge then square and that makes reasonable
to redefine these so let's call multiplication now
star 1 exponentiation star 2 square star 3 we have
a sequence now of operations and there's nothing
preventing us from carrying on exactly the same
pattern to define higher and higher operations
all right so here's an exercise please stop the
video and think about what this means right out
for star for four so write out what that actually
is by first of all figuring out what's the star
for operation should be and what it should work
out to in this particular case so to define M
star K of n for a general K first we define it
for K equals 1 and then we define it for s of
K in terms of K so M star s of K of one is by
definition M and M star s of K of s of n is M
star K of M star s of K of n you can check that
this corresponds to the steps that we've taken
to go from multiplication to exponentiation to the
star for example m star for 2 is M star 3 of gamma
because M star for 1 is M and in the last slide
we decided this was m to the M always up to the M
with MMS in that column M star 4/3 you can check
similarly that is anglea am all the way up to M
and the number of M's in this tower is equal to m
to the M over m to the M where the number of M's
in this tower is M and now to that exercise that
I gave you for star for four that turns out to be
for the for all the for the number of this tower
is this the number this tower is 4 to the 4 to the
4 to the for this number is fabulously bigger than
any number that you can usefully use in any kind
of practical application here is a nice challenge
for you let's take two numbers 27 star 99 15 and
say 2 star 103 which of these numbers is bigger
think about that for a little while not so easy
what we end up seeing is that understanding the
natural numbers is very very very complicated
most of number theory only deals with miniscule
numbers numbers less than a few trillion when
we start getting heading out into bigger and
bigger territory the numbers that we can talk
about become fewer and fewer numbers like this
that we can express so compactly become very
special numbers and most numbers are dramatically
not like them so it becomes a very complicated zoo
out there and there's no right that we have to
say that we understand all the natural numbers
we don't and there's no need to pretend that
we do we'll talk a lot of more about this in
the later videos but now we want to move on
to geometry so next time we're going to do is
geometry as studied by the ancient Greeks I hope
you'll join me for that I'm Norman Wildberger.